# Loan-Default-Prediction
# Loan-Default-Prediction
The project aims to identify correlations between loan default rate and feature variables in the loan dataset. A model is built to predict whether a customer will default his/her loan. 

Two regression/classification algorithms are used to predict the response variable,`loan_default`. The models used are - Logistic Regression and Decision Trees.

Analysis:-

- There are a few variables that considerably influence the probability of a customer defaulting on the loan. Bank Interest Rates influence loan default rates of the customer. Using data analysis techniques, it was observed that loans with interest rates less than 9.75% have never defaulted and all loans with interest rates greater than or equal to 14% have defaulted. This promotes the need to lower interest rates or encourage customers to pick low interest rate loan options to avoid unnecessary defaults. It was also observed, that even though the impact is lesser, customers with a history of bankruptcy have more tendency to default than customers without a history. The bank must perform thorough background checks for each customer before approving loans in order to avoid such cases. Loan default rates are also influenced by the term of the loan. Customers with 5 year loans have more than twice the default rate than customers with 3 year loans. Based on customer background, banks must encourage customers to apply for 3 year loans than 5 year loans. The interest earned in the surplus 2 years may be lesser than the defaulted loan which results in a loss for the banks. Hence encouraging customers to opt for a shorter tenure would help in reducing losses. It was also observed that customers with rented homes have higher default rate than any other home ownership type. Another finding is that customers who own homes have higher default rates(37.28%) than customers who have mortgaged homes(32.42%). While home ownership may not be significant factor while approving loans, it indicates the financial stability of a customer and enables the bank to make informed decisions regarding loan approvals.

- The two models that have been used on the dataset are logistic regression and decision tree. Both the models are machine learning models that have been trained over the dataset in order to recognize patterns and trends and learn from the data about various factors that can influence or have the capability to predict loans that will be defaulted. This learning can be applied to any set of future customer loan data and make predictions whether those customers will default on their loans. On running both models and comparing their ROC AOC values (ROC AOC is a performance metric that is used to evaluate the capability of models to distinguish between classes correctly - that is, the ROC AUC model enables to evaluate how well the models are able to distinguish 'Yes' and 'No' classes in the loan default, thus indicating that the model's capability to accurately predict which class of loan default any new customer loan data will fall under). An AUC value of 0.5 indicates no discrimination, 0.7 to 0.8 is considered as an acceptable value for distinguishing, 0.8 to 0.9 is considered excellent and above 0.9 is considered outstanding. The Logistic Regression model has an AUC value of 0.987 and the Decision Tree model has an AUC value of 0.96, thus indicating that both models have very good capability in distinguishing classes and hence predicting unseen customer loan default rates with higher accuracy. Based on the AUC model, logistic regression is the best classification model in terms of performance.

- The expected error is calculated as (1 - Accuracy) or (False Positive+False Negative)/Total in terms of confusion matrix. For logistic model, the expected error is (24+33) / (24+33+349+621) = 57/1027 = 0.055%. This indicates that the logistic model will have a 0.055% error rate while predicting default rates for future customer loan data. 
For decision tree model, the expected error is (37+59) / (37+59+323+608) = 96/1027 = 0.093%. This indicates that the decision tree model will have a 0.093% error rate while predicting default rates for future customer loan data.
Hence, it can be observed that decision tree models will have more error while classifying future customer loan data than logistic regression. Hence, it can be concluded that logistic regression is the best classification model. 

- A few recommendations to reduce financial losses from default would be as follows: -
    - Encourage customers to pick low interest rate loan options to avoid unnecessary defaults. The loan default would cause more monetary loss than the  
    monetary gain from high interest rates. 
    - Perform thorough background checks for each customer before approving loans in order to ensure they have zero or negligible history of bankruptcy. 
    - Encourage customers to apply for short term (3 year) loans than long term (5 year) loans. The interest earned in the surplus 2 years may be lesser than 
    the monetary loss from the loan default.
    - Perform thorough background checks for customers with rented homes. Customers with rented homes and a history of bankruptcy may be at a higher risk to
    default. Scrutinized verification must be done for such customers in order to reduce financial losses due to default. 
    
